I'm Wesley Morris and this is
Cannonball. Today, this is the person in
your neighborhood.
Anytime two very different people I love
tell me I need to watch something, I'll
do it. Even if it's something I strongly
suspect I'm not going to enjoy watching
at all. 911, what is the address?
>> My daughter got shot. His mom got shot.
Ma'am, is your mom LAYING IN THE GRASS?
YES! That's how I found myself making my
way over to Netflix to watch The Perfect
Neighbor, a documentary about a woman
who in 2023 shot and [music] killed the
lady who lives across the street in a
working-class Central Florida
neighborhood. The shooter, Susan
Lawrence, is a middle-aged white woman.
Her victim, Ajike Owens, is a much
younger black woman and the mother of
four children. Half the movie is about
the events that culminated in Owens's
murder. The other half is about what
happens in the immediate wake of her
death. And part of what makes this
movie, I'll say, fascinating is that a
lot of the film comes from police body
camera footage.
>> Turn around.
Turn around. Where's your gun at? It's
in my bedroom over there.
The movie's marriage of subject and form
raises some moral, ethical, and
emotional questions that left me no
other choice but to reach out to my
friend and colleague, Parul Sehgal, one
of my favorite critics of anything,
period, and definitely one of my
favorite people to go to to help
untangle these kinds of naughty issues
of art documenting life.
And as it turns out, I didn't even have
to ask her to watch this documentary
because
she'd already done it. Even before I
did. And like me, I think she watched
most of it from in between her fingers.
Here's my conversation with Parul.
Parul, welcome to Cannonball.
Thank you, Wesley. You were specially
requested, by the way. I mean, you're
always the the carpet's always out for
you, but somebody last night
>> Mhm. was like, "When's Parul coming on?"
And you're like, "I have something
especially dour and frightening to
[laughter] to see if I can conjure her
up with."
>> tell them what we were talking about.
But, okay, let's just
let's begin with just
why I at least dragged my feet to watch
it. Part of it is
you know,
knowing what the story was that we were
going to have to sit through
the death of a person, a person, you
know, a like a living person in a
documentary. That made me uncomfortable.
I knew this case. I'd read I'd read
about it when it happened two years ago
and had zero interest. I At no point did
I say, "You know what I'd love to see?
An entire movie about what led up to
this woman being killed."
But here we are
with this film and I'm actually curious
what drew you, of all the things you
could have been watching, to watch that.
No, I watched it with tremendous
reluctance, but I kept hearing,
especially from my friends who were
filmmakers or documentary filmmakers in
particular, that I had to see it.
>> Mhm. And [clears throat]
and not to see it in the sense that here
is something that is, you know, a
perfect
work, although it's been, you know,
generating a lot of Oscar excitement and
all of that. But they just said that
there questions in this film that you're
going to want to engage with. You're
going to want to think about.
And I saw it, as you say, like
really between my fingers. I think more
specifically kind of like in a in a
little like kind of crouch.
And for me,
the story of this film, first of all, is
just like it's somatic effect. Yeah.
Yeah.
>> It's I just I still am not sleeping
well. Like I'm still very, very jittery.
I'm still very jumpy. There's so much to
say about this film. There's so much to
dig into it. And I think that one of the
most interesting things, first of all,
is how the filmmakers have tried to to
do this, to get us to look at what seems
unbearable to watch. Well, talk to me
about the the the somatic response that
you had to watching it.
Um because I mean, I guess
is it
is it the actual circumstances? Cuz
basically what we're talking about here
is fundamentally
a community relations situation, right?
A neighborhood where the things that
typically happen in a neighborhood, um
at least a a functional one, include
such things as kids being outside and
playing all hours of the day.
And
that breaks down at some point because
somebody in the community does not like
I you know, we'll start off being very
generous. She does not like the sound of
these kids playing outside. And she does
not like their proximity to her home,
which, you know, she's expanded in her
mind the property line.
>> [laughter]
>> So that these kids are playing on her
property, so to speak. And what you're
watching is an assortment of officers
over the course of about a year and a
half talk to
the neighbors
on this street about the phone calls
that that 911 has been getting, um the
sheriff's department, from this woman
named Susan. I'm having problems with
the neighbors' children. Okay. They come
up to me and just scream like idiots.
Susan is calling to say all sorts of
things about the kids on her property.
The kids are loud. The kids are getting
on her nerves. The kids are threatening
her. The mother of four of the kids,
Ajike, is also threatening her. She's
concerned for her safety. Her nerves are
shredded. At some point, we hear her
say,
"I need I need to know what I should
do." Because they're they're I mean,
they're ridiculous. I'm going to go.
I don't bother anybody. I'm a single
woman. I work from home. You know, I'm
peaceful. I'm quiet. I'm like the
perfect neighbor. It's a very You think
it's almost like we're seeing a stage
set, Mhm. right? All the interactions
take place on that street. It's like the
curtain rises and it's like another
incident, another call. 911, what is the
address of the emergency? They got kids
dressed up as clowns. They're leaving
all of their toys around. Right? We keep
coming back to that place. And we keep
coming back to familiar people, right?
Familiar uh neighbors will come out.
Phyllis, the the the one
um sort of incandescent with rage white
woman who lives there and just cannot
believe how Susan is talking to the
children, right? She's also
uh calling them names.
>> them slaves. She told them that the
field that they were on was wasn't the
underground railroad. And the officers
are coming back repeatedly. You know,
they come back and they're like, "Yeah,
we know the situation. We know this
woman." We see something of a dynamic
emerge between the police and and the
neighborhood.
>> See, every time I'm going I walk past,
she thinks we're trying to steal her
truck or buy her truck.
>> We're not even old enough to drive a
car. We're 11.
>> Okay. I found that fascinating, the way
in which Susan
brings the police
and this neighborhood in alignment with
each other. In like human alignment,
right? Not strategic alignment. Um
although the police are trying to give
the the kids and the parents advice
about how to behave with respect to this
person, which is basically just leave
her alone. If she starts screaming at
you guys, I want you to go tell an
adult, okay? I don't want you to
antagonize her, okay? Because what that
what happens is when you guys antagonize
her, she can make you guys look bad. And
you guys are just out here playing,
right? Yeah, but they give them advice,
but it's very striking to because they
make them responsible, right?
>> Yes. Yes.
>> are responsible. The kids are like,
"Don't aggravate Don't antagonize her.
>> Don't antagonize." And you know what's
interesting is when the police come and
speak to the to the
neighbors and specifically to the
children, what do they do but remember?
I was a kid once. Every I was a kid
once. We're all loud as kids. We like to
yell and scream and fight and so I get
it. Almost every single cop slips into
this reverie. I remember when I was a
kid.
>> doing this. I remember doing worse than
what you're doing. There's there's this
this way that they're both,
you know,
kind of seemingly moved by the children
and remembering their own childhoods,
but not treating the children like
children. Mhm.
>> Right? There's no concern for the fact
that she's yelling hateful and it seems
to be racist Yes. Yes.
>> speech in their direction, that she's
harassing. Right? There's no
it's very, very striking that it's sort
of seen as this well, unhinged, cranky
old lady, you know, who we just it's
best to it's best not to rile her up.
Just don't upset her, right? So
I think that this movie's really
interesting to me because I I do think
that when I
think about it, when I struggle with it,
it's with two films. One is the film
that I think the documentary filmmakers
think they're making.
>> Oh, I love this distinction. I love this
distinction.
>> one is the film that I'm watching,
right? And I think that
as far as I can tell from interviews and
all of this,
they see the film as indicting the
officers in a way that I don't.
>> Mhm. Right? And then I think that most
of us don't
>> indictment?
>> That that there was not more of a sense
of sticking up for the kids and and
being more proactive in protecting the
community. Right? But that's not what I
think most of us get when we watch the
film. I should say a little bit about
the director, who's very, very
interesting.
A woman named Geeta Gandbhir, who is
Indian-American and got her start I
think the first movie she ever worked on
was Malcolm X. Mhm. She
>> Spike Lee's [clears throat] Malcolm X.
Spike Lee's Malcolm X in 1992.
>> Um she was a student at Harvard studying
animation and Spike Lee came to speak
and she just went up to him and said, "I
want to I want to apprentice with you. I
want to work with you." And she got an
internship and she worked
and edited a slew of his movies. Um
Bamboozled,
um When the Levees Broke, she's just
been in
in the world of telling stories about
racial justice and also gender.
I think she made a documentary called
I'm Evidence about untested rape kits,
right? So, she's somebody who really
thinks about storytelling and advocacy
together, very very closely related. And
she's a personal connection to this to
this story, you know, it was
a relative some relatives of hers were
very close to Ajika. In fact, I think
one of her relatives
lived in that house
before Ajika did and said, "Come come to
this community."
Come actually live in this house. This
is a great place to raise children.
>> is like an in-law of the film.
>> is I think her sister-in-law. Okay. So,
when she heard of the of the of the
killing, she went down and they started
taking a lot of footage, a lot of
interviews in part not to make a film at
first, but to sort of draw attention to
the case. And as they were reviewing it,
she says she was like, "This is This is
a This is a film." And in interviews,
she's very very clear about
about wanting to indict the system and
saying the system not only failed the
community, it failed AJ, it failed the
children, but it also in a way failed
Susan. It did not protect her from
herself. This is what she says. That's
not the film I I saw.
>> Right, no, that's [laughter] not.
That's not the movie I've seen. Wait,
hold on. I want to actually come back to
the movie we saw.
>> Yeah.
But in order to do that, I want to sort
of spend a little more time in like the
the the the granular details of like I
want to come back to this question of
what it is that we are watching law
enforcement do. Not just watching law
enforcement. What are we watching as law
enforcement? Yeah. We are the camera
around their necks.
>> Right. Right.
>> We identify with them. Right. Right.
>> Right? In so many scenes.
Especially the scenes at night when they
go to Susan's house and they've got the
flashlight and they're ringing the
doorbell and then they move away to
create that birth. Whose fear am I
identifying with in that moment, Wesley?
I mean
>> Right? Yes. Yes.
>> Who am I being
collapsed Whose consciousness am I being
collapsed inside?
>> The The other thing that I find really
notable about the about this
framework that we're talking about and
the way you've identified who we're
identifying with just in terms of point
of view is the number of times we hear
the police say to Susan, "You know what?
I know you don't like these kids playing
and making all this noise and stuff. I
know you think it's obnoxious, but
>> But, I'd rather kids be screaming cuz
they're out here playing and having a
good time than stealing cars and robbing
people. So, I'd rather have them doing
this than committing crime. I'd rather
be here talking to you about like noise.
And I felt like there like the binary
here
is that if these kids aren't getting on
Susan Lawrence's nerves, they're going
to be out in the streets doing something
else.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> There's something about
the way that the police talk to the kids
where it almost sort of feels like
they're future criminals in some way.
Or like criminals like there's crime in
out there waiting for them somewhere.
Well, there's crime inside them. Yeah.
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Crime in here's
to these people and like like
just just don't aggravate. Don't get to
a point where like you have to
like have an incident with this person.
>> the potential obviously it's it's so
different for for Susan, right? Because
the way that they treat her and interact
with her as if there is no potential for
danger in her.
Right? Right. I also
>> children are essentially as you're
saying potential criminals sort of kind
of
something in them is is going to emerge
that is dangerous and destructive,
right? But for Susan, despite however
unhinged she's behaving, she's
essentially benign and treated that way.
Mhm. Right? And the fact that at no
point is Susan regarded as a threat.
Right? Even to the point where they
describe that she'd been seen
brandishing a gun. Mhm. Yes. She'd
thrown things. She was using
racist speech at the children, right? At
no point
do the police officers does anybody
speak to the parents about harassment?
About abusing uh emergency services.
Mhm.
>> At no point does that come up. Right.
There's a very odd uh sort of disturbing
interlude where it's revealed where she
had gotten her truck
stuck behind like a locked fence for
some reason.
>> Like locked locked on the gate.
>> right? It's never really explained how
that happened, what she was doing there.
We don't know.
>> No. But we do know that she used her
truck to ram her way out or try to ram
her way out. And the the guy has called
the police to be like, you know,
she [__] my gate up.
>> [laughter]
>> Like y'all need to do something about
this. And they
they trace the car to her address and
they show up.
ONE MINUTE.
AND SHE COMES TO THE DOOR. JEEZ. And
she's indignant.
Sheriff's office.
What do you want? Are you Ms. Susan?
Yes, I am.
>> Can you step out here for a second? I
was in bed. Okay.
It's the first time in the movie
where we understand
that something
I mean, it's not the first time we
understand it. It's a corroboration of
what we what we have already come to
suspect, which is that this person is
off. Something is ratcheting up in her.
Something is starting to happen. And so,
I packed and then I really packed. So,
>> thought I was in trouble, like I thought
someone was going to hurt me. Okay. So,
here's the issue that we're going to
have, all right? This person is capable
of damage, right? And one of the things
the guy says who owns this mysterious
lot. We don't even know what it is. He
says there's a number people call the
number if they get locked in.
But she didn't, you know?
>> it. Yeah, and then we also see that
>> And she we know she can call a number.
>> [laughter]
>> I mean, we Yes. Yes. Um, but we also see
there
again that defense of
my fear and my perception, my inability
to hold my own fear justifies any and
everything. Right.
>> You know, there isn't that sense of like
I can't believe this happened. This is
unlike No, there is a sense of listen,
when I get to this place, I can
you know, I feel entitled to do these
things. And Susan
fully understands I mean, we can we can
get into or set aside even what her
state of mind is, her her her mental
health.
But fundamentally for my purposes at
least, this is a white woman who
understands the power of her whiteness.
And the kids also understand the power
of her whiteness because she is called
the Karen. You guys chasing a dog or
trying to put a dog into a car or
something? No. The Karen called. Yeah.
The Karen called.
>> Yeah, she's saying
>> I don't know why she keeps trying to
race her kids. The neighborhood
understands her and these 11-year-old
kids also understand as 11-year-olds
what their relationship is to this
person.
Like among themselves, they're
they're just living life. They're not a
problem. But this woman is
problematizing them.
And understands that one way to lure the
attention, cuz I feel like this is part
of the dynamic here, the attention of
the police
is by
>> [clears throat]
>> exploiting the thing that we're talking
about about the the crime inside these
children.
Like where no crime is being committed,
but the fact of them, the fact of them
is a crime.
>> The fact of them is a crime and the fact
of her as she experiences herself is
what she regards as her profound
vulnerability. Victimhood.
>> Every time we see her, it's very
striking. Not every time, but I noticed
how how she'll frequently be like, "I'm
cold." She's she's
always trying to make herself small, in
physical discomfort. This is hurting. I
have this ailment. I'm working on You
know, so there's a sense of her own
inflated sense of
uh her own weakness, her own
vulnerability, her own fear, her own
victimhood. And I think what's
interesting about Susan in these moments
is that we get to see the variety of
moves she has, right? We see different
versions of her. Yes. And
that to me I think
you know, when I was sort of processing
this film and trying to ask myself,
"What did I see
sitting through this film?" Which was so
hard to watch. And
again, it goes back to this idea that
the that the film that the these
filmmakers have have given us
slightly it's it's a bit more wayward
than they would like, you know? And I
think that
one of the things that has it shows us
very very clearly are these
selves that people create and trot out
in front of
institutions.
And
how dramatically we see a Susan who will
be protesting, "I'm scared of the
children." Or "What do you want? I'm
It's I mean, indignant. It's nighttime.
How dare you bother me? Oh, I'm in
trouble. Okay, I'm a little bit cold."
>> I'm I'm I'm a child now.
>> And that I'm a child. But then when that
doesn't quite work, then we hear that
other voice, a very pragmatic voice
happens. "Listen, I've taken some
medicines. That's why I didn't want to
talk. Now I can talk and I can explain
it and I can make it right."
>> Right. You know?
>> Yes. Yes.
>> see the savvy. Right. There's the
victim, the orchestrator,
and um
um
>> the police throughout this film in a way
that I found very interesting. She's
very good at it.
>> She's very good at it.
>> all the summoning. But we should say
that the one time um to just sort of be
in the
in the events of the film
the one time that
the community calls the police on Susan,
it's too late.
911, what is the address?
And as the police are approaching what
we're hearing is and seeing are people
on the street waving to the police to
come help.
And
it's really devastating.
In part because, you know, we know that
Aiyana Owens has been shot. And
you're watching
the kids cry for their mother.
The neighbors cry for the kids and the
mother.
At some point it's clear that
a parent is needed so they call they
summon the police summon the father to
come to the scene.
And then the father is tasked
with telling the kids that the mother
has died.
>> to see the father be told. Yes.
>> And he lets out this sort of primal
sound.
Yeah.
>> Right. This is his ex. This is the
mother of his children. He lets out a
sound that I don't think I've heard
something like that on on camera.
No. They're full of emotion and it's
>> And it's rare. No. And in part also as
you're watching that
you know, we're watching it because
there's a police officer following him,
right? He kind of staggers off. And
there's somebody watching him.
Everything we see it's because there's a
there's a cop standing there.
>> Right? And very close. Right? And we
also as you say he has to tell the
children.
Today has been
a very bad day.
Something bad has happened.
Y'all y'all seen it. Y'all understand
it. Y'all experienced it, right?
Okay.
Y'all love me?
Okay. Y'all love mom?
All right.
Well, I got some bad news to tell you.
Mom is not coming back anymore.
Come uh-uh. Come come come come. No. No,
don't. Come here. Come over here. Listen
to me.
No. No, I know.
I mean that's something that
I don't know. I I was following the
sort of conversations online about the
ethics of showing that scene of the
children
hearing that their mother had been
killed. And um
how people feel, you know, just and and
I I I don't know. I I I also really
struggled with that. I I struggled with
like this is something that I don't know
if I'm entitled to see, Mhm. you know?
Do I deserve to see this? I really
struggled with this. I really struggled
with
the notion of
of how I would feel as a child having
that moment
captured in that way.
And then put on the world's biggest
streaming platform.
Right? And the idea about children and
informed consent and all the sort of
stuff that we think about.
Aiyana's mother was very intent on
keeping all of this in the movie.
And the filmmakers and her as they as
they've been, you know, sort of doing
interviews Her name is Pamela Diaz.
>> Pamela Diaz, right? And and she's one of
the things that she said is that she's
invoked the lineage and she said that
Mhm.
she thinks about the mother of Emmett
Till.
>> Mhm. Mamie Till, sure. Who insisted that
her son's bludgeoned corpse be put on
display for the world to see at the
funeral.
>> Mhm. And then to be photographed and
put in magazines, you know, to say look
what look what they did to my child.
You know? So
this is something that
also feels
so deeply important to consider when you
think about
a film like this which is made for a
number of reasons, right? And one of the
reasons I think this film was made as
the directors have said
was for the family, you know?
And was a way to do something with their
grief and to translate their grief into
um
a form of action, a form of
memorialization, you know? I really want
to sit with
how the movie was made
because I think
a really surprising thing that happens
at least for me because, you know, the
thing that the movie tells you the
minute you sit down to watch it is like
this film is comprised of 2 years of
police body camera footage.
What it does not tell you
is that you will be spending the back
half of this film
basically with Susan and her police
interrogation, two of them. I was
astonished by
the second interrogation.
Susan, Okey dokey.
Something wrong, Susan?
Susan, I appreciate you coming back in
and talking.
Because that's the one where the, you
know, the detectives kind of they know
what they're going to do at the end of
this thing. They're going to basically
arrest her. And they're asking her
questions about whether or not, you
know, if we looked at your search
history right now Is there any anything
kind of research on your internet
history that would show that you've done
research on like self-defense? Or have
you ever heard of the term stand your
ground?
>> Yes. Have you ever done any kind of
research on that? Yes, when it was
mentioned on
some guy shot
um [clears throat]
someone at a convenience store and they
said stand your ground now. I was Which
she concedes, you know, I have cuz four
I think it's a four weeks pass
between the the the shooting
Aiyana's death and the second
interrogation. That's a substantial
amount of time. Yeah. Susan, I think you
know the reason why I'm asking that
question. You you're you're smart, okay?
And the and the reason is
>> Oh, hell no. No, absolutely. I know what
you're thinking. Did I look up the laws
so I could do something? No, absolutely
not. No. No. No. Absolutely not.
>> because you were you were tired of this
person, you were tired of the situation
that they Absolutely not. We kind of
went through your first interview. And
in that first interview But at some
point, you know, he's like, "Ma'am, I'm
going to have to place you under
arrest."
And the most extraordinary thing
happens.
Okay, so you're going to go with this
deputy. No, I'm not. You're going to be
booked in. No, I'm not. And
fingerprinted.
>> No.
They're going to take your pictures
and then you'll have an arraignment in
the morning.
I'm not going. I'm sorry. She says no.
There's the phone down there. You'll be
able to call whoever you need to call
right there in booking. I'm not going.
But um
Susan, you've we are we are going. Um
there's no change in that now. You're
you're under arrest. In fact,
um we'll probably go ahead and put
handcuffs on you. Let's get you Let's
get you handcuffed. No. Stand up.
>> No, don't twist me. Susan, stand up,
Susan.
>> Listen, it can go one of two ways. It
can go an easy way
>> [sighs]
>> And all I could think was
I've never thought about the
interrogation room as a privileged space
before. Yeah.
But think about all the people who never
get to see one.
>> [clears throat]
>> NEVER GET TO SEE ONE TO PLEAD THEIR
CASE, to explain why they did what they
did.
To even have the chance to be
>> [laughter]
>> trapped into saying the wrong thing.
What do you think they think they're
showing us?
Mhm.
Damn, Pearl.
That's my question for you.
Let's figure it out because I I
I think that one thing that's happening
in that room, the movieness of this
thing
>> Very much so. Yes. Yes. is what I found
to be
the most unsettling.
This is a very deeply profoundly
watchable movie.
>> Mhm.
>> [laughter]
>> I know how to watch this movie.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> I have been trained by the movies to
watch
this movie.
>> film sort of watches you watching it,
right? Yeah.
>> can anticipate
all these things. So why is it
distressing its watchability to you?
Because
it's incomplete Mhm. alignment
>> Mhm. with the police.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> [snorts]
>> The police
I mean, you know, cuz the question with
found footage for me, my sticking point
has always been who is the editor here?
Who has brought these images to us?
Right? You want to know who has
assembled it, who has touched it, who
has cut it. I mean, this is film that's
also like the idea of working with found
footage or found text and reclaiming
them and subverting them is not new,
right? You have so many works of history
that have to derive from instruments of
state surveillance and torture. All of
the books of history, right? That have
to go in and rely on archives of
slavery, for example. Are trying to
remake something out of
deeply barbaric documents, you know? But
there is always some kind of
consideration about how this is being
handled, how this is being put together,
how it's being reconstituted. You know,
I'm thinking of people like Saidiya
Hartman Sure. I mean
>> deeply about what it means to use
anything in a state's archive.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> And a great academic and scholar and
author Saidiya Hartman whose work has
essentially been about the sort of
almost
genial like spiritual genealogical
legacy of the history of this country
and how it just lives in us.
And how sometimes these pieces and these
scraps from these archives are all we
have and we have to make use of them,
but we also have to make
take great pains to explain how they've
come into our hands, their particular
power, what they reify. There's an
ethics that you have to deploy in the
use of these materials.
>> Yes, and I think that the queasiness,
the discomfort
uh
that attends the watching of this film
comes from
I think it the the filmmakers' really
deep conviction that they are doing
something subversive with this. And I
And I actually don't know if I I don't
know because I do think that one of the
reasons
the film has had this kind of purchase
on the imagination and and and seemingly
at least or I'm sitting galvanized so
many people is because what's actually
subversive is not that they're
reclaiming and retaking this footage and
putting it to other ends, it's that it's
humanizing the police. That's what feels
subversive to a lot of these viewers,
right? [laughter] That they're actually
these really nice guys and I'm watching
the police come and you know
walk up to these group of children and
and oh oh my gosh, they're sympathizing
with them, you know? They're they're
muttering that the that the
you know, the the Karen is a psycho. You
know, they seem to be on
the side of the children and the side of
the community, but it's it's um
I don't know. It's it's I but I I the
film does not seem to be entirely in
control of what it's No, no, no, no, no,
no.
And I think like
this is the best this is the best you
can hope for.
Right? This is the best case scenario
>> Yeah. for this footage. Yeah. And what I
think is going to happen is I don't
know. This to me is
a floodgate opening
I don't know what happens in the wake of
this thing, but
but what we're talking about the the use
of archival anything to make anything
old old old old old. But the use like
filing a FOIA request, a Freedom of
Information Act request
to get this footage, this body cam
footage and turning that into art and
entertainment
is a that's new.
We're in we're in a new realm here.
Well, I think also like the documentary
is going to be in a profoundly different
realm because one of the things that
I've loved about the form is the moment
where somebody comes to sit down in
front of the camera and kind of adjust
themselves and
>> [laughter]
>> do you know what I mean? That scene
that's so paradigmatic and then
and then they begin [clears throat] to
speak. And it's kind of like the way
that even before they say something I've
already got an attitude towards It's the
classic like
And then they'll be like, is this my mic
on? Is my Is my hair okay?
>> I'm Wesley Morris.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm a critic at the New York Times.
Well, it was an ordinary Tuesday. Um
But that moment of like that encounter
that we have with someone as they start
to narrativize their own experience and
think that they have the truth and think
they know. And so much of documentary is
about a bunch of different people
sitting together and realizing that
that's not what happened. That's not
what I knew. So, this is it. This is it.
Yeah, go on. No, keep going.
I don't know where I was going. Well,
it's basically that like
that
that tension has been removed from this
process, right?
>> effort to remove that tension and
there's a there's an effort to replace
it with something that feels objective
and will be presented to us as
objective, right? So, in fact, what was
beautiful about documentary is that
for me at least it was always
nudging me, the ones that I love, into a
place of like
deeply conditional partial revelations,
partial truths, you know,
interpretation, people still living
with what they thought had happened and
a sense that they would go on and still
have their own other interpretations,
right? The complexity of this movie and
the reason that I find it fascinating is
that
you
are watching I mean, the system is the
filmmaker here.
Right? The system is at least the camera
operator. The system is part of the
filmmaking team.
So, I am inherently
I don't know if distrust is right.
But I
I'm a little queasy. Yes.
But it's just and that that queasiness,
that feeling of skepticism, that feeling
of I don't know if I can trust this or
believe this. These are always feelings
I'm grateful to have and I think you are
too.
>> in a work of art or
>> Absolutely, right? Anything that makes
you more attentive, that makes you able
to hold these sorts of ambiguities. I
like. Right? Where I come into
uh
>> [sighs]
>> where I struggle with this film, not in
a productive way, is that this is not
the movie that the filmmakers say they
made, right? They made a movie, as they
say, that is rooted and embedded in the
community where they took a form of
technology that is used to surveil and
is used to protect police officers and
from that they have made a film in which
I mean, it's a film, but it's also a
fairy tale, right? In which there is
this beautiful multi-racial
community that is cohesive, that looks
after each other and their children,
right? And there is this
ogre who lives under the bridge.
>> Right? Who
you know, we don't really think deeply
about motivations. We don't really
really think No, we don't really know
very much about anybody in this film, do
we? And I think that that moment in the
the moment with the truck I think is
pertinent because it's also one of the
few times that we have any other sense
of access of story about any of the any
of the characters, so to speak, you
know? That that feels a side that we can
use to sort of try to understand what
has happened. Can I bring in one
piece of information that's not in the
film? Sure. I just wanted to I just I
So, you went and dug around.
>> around. I dug around. And I one of the
things that I just became curious I
mean, because the film itself is so
incurious about
its characters as people. And can use
the form as a kind of plausible
deniability. Exactly. Exactly, right?
And it's not only that it doesn't ask
questions of Susan, but we don't really
see Ajike. We don't really see the
children really as specific children. We
see them as a group. Right. Right.
Right? And I understand why that's the
case, but I also just became curious
about about the specific sort of
personalities and histories behind it.
And one of the things I mean, you can
see all of this is online the the
the trial, the um the testimonies of of
Susan's sister also, which is very
harrowing, you know? And sort of shares
her own story of their father was a
Hungarian immigrant who was in a
concentration camp, sexually and
physically abused both girls from the
age of three on.
So much it's so painful. There's so much
suffering. But one detail really did
stick out to me, which is um
is that the two girls as
And I think it's because it isn't
presented as important.
The sister says that as children
the two girls were put in charge of the
household. They had to cook for the men.
They had to do all the cleaning.
You know what they didn't do?
They didn't play.
You know? And she doesn't say she
doesn't say use the word play. She just
describes like a daily routine that is
just backbreaking, you know? And I just
think that there's something there about
not just her rage where those children
are concerned,
but a kind of envy.
Yeah.
Well, like a failure Well, I don't know.
I mean, she probably associates
I don't know. I mean, I don't want to
get too much in her head.
I do think that there's something about
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> feeling
that that freedom that those kids are
experiencing
is
almost a mockery of her trauma. To the
extent that I mean, none of this is
exonerating. It's just It's just It's
just explanatory in some way. It's
explanatory and I think it brings out
for me at least this important
this important aspect of the film,
right? When you talk about uh Susan
weaponizing
her
gender and race, right? To call the
police as a white woman in danger means
something very specific, right?
But in part she's doing that because
she's weaponizing what she considers to
be her trauma and she feels entitled
because of that. She feels entitled
because what she has endured is And what
she tells the the police officers again
and again, the children are threatening
me and listen, I have this history of
sexual and domestic abuse, right? So,
the entitlement of her background, the
entitlement of the trauma she's endured
feels salient to me in this story as
well.
I don't enjoy the talking head movie or
documentary approach often because it
just it leads you nowhere visually
interesting. True.
But
what winds up happening as a result in
some cases is that you
sort of
you run a foul of a lot of ethical
concerns in the pursuit of some higher
morality.
And I think that's where this movie
lives. Because it seems to both pose and
live in
these deeply difficult ethical knots.
Right.
>> Um and so the ones that the sort of
questions that this film is putting
in our faces right now um
about
you know, about intelligence, about art
without fingerprints,
about uh
what it means to work with this footage,
about where our sympathy lies, about the
lines between art and advocacy, I think
are just very very
useful to see.
>> I do feel like we I I do feel like this
movie is is very complicated and very
deep [music] and raises a lot of
questions and I think that like And I'm
grateful for those questions. We
we got to talk about them, which is all
I really wanted to do. Two.
>> [music]
>> Thanks. Thank you, Wesley.